Hera's welcome back to another night sky
news for June 2020 like seriously how
did it get to choose poverty I don't
know how this happened but we have so
much
astrophysics news to talk about but
first of all let's start by thinking
about what we can see in the night sky
in the coming month
[Music]
first up on the 18th and 19th of June so
if you're watching this the day this
video comes out on the 17th I'm talking
about tomorrow morning and Friday
morning I want you to look out for you
guessed it my favorite the toenail moon
as usual now this is actually pairing up
again with Venus and I'm like how in
previous months of the year we've been
seeing Venus in the evening sky Venus is
sort of move round to the other side of
the Sun now so we see it in the morning
sky it's still very close to the Sun
though so it's gonna be very very low on
the horizon so this is gonna probably be
a little bit of a difficult one to spot
if you do catch it obviously send those
pictures my way then a little bit of a
fun fact for you on the 4th of July
earth is gonna be at its furthest
position away from the Sun it's
something we call up heel on as opposed
to perihelion where it's closest to the
Sun which is in January so in a minute
we're in the middle of Northern
Hemisphere summer
apparently it's currently chucking it
down outside here doesn't really look
like summer to me it's raining sideways
so this just shows you that you know our
distance from the Sun in our orbit has
no bearing on our seasons that's caused
by the tilt of the Earth's axis if
you're curious as I was the earth will
be 94 million five hundred thousand
miles away on 4th of July as opposed to
91 million four hundred thousand miles
away when it is in January that's about
a three million or so difference and it
means that the Sun will actually be
about 3.6 percent smaller in the sky
than it usually is now you can actually
see this in photographs that have been
taken with the proper filter so that
it's actually safe to photograph the Sun
but you know if you're watching your
sunset at the minute and you can see it
dipping below the horizon you're not
gonna be able to really notice any
difference in the Sun size with your
naked eye it's just a little fun fact to
know then on the fifth of July we're
back into full moon territory and as it
rises in the southeast it's actually
gonna be rising with Jupiter and Saturn
so
really easy way to be able to spot
Jupiter and Saturn Jupiter will be the
brightest thing after the moon and
Saturn will be sort of a very yellowish
looking star that's not twinkling
because it's a planet that's nearby if
you you know need one of those apps to
help you make sure that that's what
you're seeing then then download one of
those but I'd recommend if you have
binoculars anywhere in your house
breaking them out and actually checking
out what Jupiter Assassin look like
through binoculars
Jupiter is particularly spectacular
because you can see it's four main
biggest moons as well the Galilean moons
and if you go back night after night you
will see them change positions which is
always such a fun thing to do
unfortunately you can't see Saturn's
rings with binoculars you do use
telescope for that do you have a
telescope though what a great way of
spending the evening and trying to find
Saturn because it's so close to the moon
and Jupiter at the minute makes it quite
easy breaking out a telescope and
looking at Saturn's rings in all their
glory then on July 11th and 12 if you
time it right just before sunrise you'll
be able to see Saturn and Jupiter just
setting in the West while Venus comes up
in the East is sort of close to the
sunrise and you'll have Mars sort of
directly south as well so really
spectacular time right now in June to
actually see the planet so you know the
moons that a variety with Jupiter and
Saturn is probably for the night owls
but this sort of perspective is really
for sort of those people who like to get
up early so channel one you prefer you
know you can try and have a look for in
July Jupiter and Saturn are also going
to be in what we call opposition soon
which is where they're sort of directly
opposite in the sky from the Sun so the
Sun Earth and then say Jupiter make a
nice line sort of in the solar system
and that's when those planets are
actually brightest so Jupiter will be
July 14th in Sandton July 20th that's
when they'll actually be the brightest
but really all through the month of July
they're going to look really really nice
and bright in this guy so as spectacular
as the planets are gonna look this month
in the night sky let's move on to what's
been going on in astrophysics and space
exploration news cuz there's so much to
talk about
[Music]
the big news this month was obviously
the very successful first-ever crewed
mission of SpaceX's dragon crafts up to
the International Space Station it was
the very first commercial craft to take
astronauts up to the ISS and sort of
really marked this sort of turning point
in how NASA is gonna manage you know who
takes care of what you know they're
gonna have commercial companies
launching astronauts in space basically
doing the relatively easy stuff and
they're gonna focus on how you know we
get people back to the moon and then use
that to get onwards to Mars so
astronauts Bob Behnken and dog Halley
made it safely to the ISS their return
is scheduled maybe sort of July August
time NASA and SpaceX haven't quite
decided when they'll come back yet in
the meantime whilst they're on the ISS
there's some you know spacewalks plan to
change some batteries and power pot
packed box can't speak today Power Packs
on the outside of the ISS and they're
also going to be there on site to help
NASA and SpaceX analyze you know the
launch dates are in the orbital data and
the performance of Dragon on its way to
the ISS as well and they're also gonna
be testing its capabilities as a
lifeboat you know that can be used in
emergencies so the idea is that they are
going to fully shut down dragon which is
how it will usually operate after
returning astronauts the ISS and then
they're gonna reboot it back up again to
check that reboot you know happen
smoothly but also then it can be done
very quickly in an emergency so first I
wanna talk about this nature paper that
came out this month by Nicastro and
carburetors now a lot of you sent me the
news report on this story this month
either on Twitter or Instagram and it
was great to see like your excitement
about it was it was so many misleading
headlines about this work because they
made it sound like what they found was
dark matter when in fact it was missing
normal matter that they found so back in
the 90s
astronomers essentially did like a big
census of all the visible matter in the
universe essentially you would like well
okay how many
like galaxies can we see how many stars
are in those galaxies on average and so
how much like normal luminous matter is
there in the universe and they said over
also then attributed for a lot of stuff
that we can't see you know like dust and
gas as well to try and sort of put a
number on you know like how much stuff
actually is there and they found that it
was about half of what cosmology I our
best model of the universe going from
sort of like the Big Bang to now
predicted should have been there and
that sort of might sound troubling you
might be like well maybe the models
wrong but that was just a pretty good
job everywhere else there's still a few
problems with it which we talked about
on this channel before but it all our
models we have it it does the best job
and so a lot of people sort of thought
well perhaps where that matter is that
we actually haven't been able to see is
in the sort of what appears to be empty
space right it's in the space between
all of the galaxies but no one had ever
been able to prove that before until now
until they study they actually found
this matter is residing in what we call
the cosmic web this sort of is that
structure that binds all galaxies
together with this web of gas and dark
matter and I've done this in a really
cool way what they've used is fast radio
bursts you know this sort of mystery of
these radio signals coming from space
that we maybe can't quite explain yet
those who watched last month's night Sky
News know there was that exciting piece
of evidence that maybe they're coming
from magnet ours but we don't want to
sort of like jump the gun yet but
they've been able to use these fast
radio bursts and the frequencies that
they're receiving from the fast radio
bursts so you know what frequency is the
actual wave because different
frequencies will be affected differently
by matter that is in the way and how
much they're affected can then tell you
how much matter it's encountered on the
way here because fast radio bursts come
from very distant galaxies and they're
very very bright that signal we can
still read it and so then what you can
do is by knowing the distance from us to
the galaxies that it's
come from we can then work out the
density of the matter that is in that
intervening space the intergalactic
space and so what this paper has found
that it's it's roughly about one berry
on a one normal particle like a neutron
or a proton per cubic meter so pretty
empty but still not completely empty
there is still matter there and although
a cubic meter you know it's pretty big
on our scales just have one particle in
it if you think about how much space
there is between galaxies that are
separated by you know billions of light
years it adds up and it can account for
all of that missing matter from the 90s
where they were missing sort of half of
it too much cosmological predictions now
just for comparison's sake to put this
into perspective the intergalactic space
is what one baryon per cubic meters the
space between galaxies the space between
stars the interstellar space in the
Milky Way we also consider that to be
very empty right the you know space
between the Sun and the nearest star is
empty but actually the density of normal
matter there is about a million times
intergalactic space it's a million
baryons per cubic meter so it really
puts it into perspective you know that
space isn't really empty but
intergalactic space is probably the
emptiest so the reason there's a lot to
talk about this month is because last
week the first third of June was the 236
meeting of the American Astronomical
Society of course that didn't happen in
person at all it was all virtual and
online but it means there was lots of
results presented and discussed as well
but often when this happens you don't
have the written up paper the written up
work to go with it yet because it's sort
of announced is like oh here's this cool
thing we think we found like what what
do you all think about it and there's a
lot of discussion that takes place
around it before like the paper then
gets like fully submitted and everything
so the one I want to talk about next
this result it really did catch my eye
it's something I'm very interested in
but the paper isn't out yet so you know
we take everything with a little pinch
of salt because it's not been
peer-reviewed yet but it's still really
cool results so this talk that was given
and then you know they put out a press
release and everything as well was on
the magnetic field around the
supermassive black hole in the center of
the Milky Way which by itself is a
really cool result because it's a very
poorly understood topic as well as sort
of like magnetic fields around black
holes but the reason this caught my eye
is because it was also from the Sofia
team and Sofia is a NASA telescope on an
aeroplane now this is not just for like
shirts and giggles this is to get the
telescope above 99% of the Earth's
atmosphere because the telescope on
board this airplane is an infrared
telescope and the Earth's atmosphere
absorbs so much infrared light that
really nothing makes it down to the
surface now you might be thinking isn't
it just better to like launch a
telescope into space rather than like
having to fly an airplane every time you
want to use this telescope well yes and
we are planning to do that with the
James Webb Space Telescope that's coming
very soon hopefully in 2021 if the
schedule is stuck to this time but in
the meantime you know let's put a
telescope on a 747 see if we can bring
this back to top now you would think
this sort of gravity would be the
reigning force around a supermassive
black hole because well they're just so
massive but actually as material falls
in to the surrounding regions of a black
hole it gets pulled into what we call an
accretion disk you know the same way
that the solar system is all in one
plane and everything is sort of moving
around the Sun and the gas that falls in
it gets superheated because it's
traveling at such ridiculous speeds as
it's spiraling around that black hole
there's so much energy there that energy
actually ionizes the gas that's around
the black hole what that means is that
it takes the electrons from in atoms and
removes them it gives them enough energy
to escape the atoms when that happens
you no longer got like a neutral gas
you've got like a gas with positively
charged ions that's something we call a
plasma
and as that plasma sort of moves around
you've got moving charges moving charges
cell magnetic fields and them because
they're moving their electric field to
get all sort of like into woven and it's
very very complex it's very difficult to
study you know not least because you
know a magnetic field is invisible
towards we only ever see you know the
influence of say like a bar magnet when
we can put it down you know on a big
collection of iron filings and those
iron filings all line up to show you the
magnetic field around it so what we
really need to study this is sort of
like the space equivalent of iron
filings right and thankfully we do kind
of have that with interstellar dust it's
basically just lots of little particles
of heavier elements including you know
metals like iron you know people know
that I like to call this you know
supernova poop that's just littered you
know through space and usually dust is
really annoying to astronomers
personally for my work it's so
infuriating because what it does is it
absorbs a lot of the UV light the very
high-energy light especially the sort of
stuff that's coming from that plasma
that's spiraling around the black hole
and it reread Yeats it in the infrared
now the light that's really turd will be
polarized which means it likes to move
through space and a very certain way so
light is a wave you know that moves sort
of like this and if it's coming towards
you it will be moving like this but
that's a very specific direction that
it's moving in it could also be coming
at you like this or like this or like
that so light bulbs give out light that
can come at you with any sort of
direction that it likes to move in any
polarization and the same is true for
the Sun for example as well and that's
why you'll pull the rise song glasses
work because they only let in the light
that's traveling in a certain way and so
they filter out a lot of the sun's light
now this dust that's reradiating in the
infrared the way that the light will
then be orientated will depend on the
magnetic field so if you can measure how
the light has arrived or there it's like
this the weather it's like this or this
then you can work out what
magnetic field is doing around the black
hole and essentially they'll act like
your little iron filings so then this is
what they found this is a composite
image which means it's two separate
things going on here so in the
background the sort of gray is actually
a Hubble Space Telescope image of the
center of the galaxy but anything you
can then see instead of green and blue
is the sofia infrared data is basically
like the raw light the dust is emitting
and then you can also see those sort of
like streamlines on there as well
they've been drawn to show sort of the
direction and the polarization of this
dust that traces out the magnetic field
also complete side note here but the
credit for this image is someone called
el proud fit and all I could think of
when I saw that was okay anyway John
schmaltz on behalf of the Sofia team
announced this at the WS last month and
not only did they release this image but
they also announced that the magnetic
field strength and pressure was much
higher than previously thought as I said
we saw the gravity would always dominate
around a supermassive black hole and
that might be true really quite close in
but actually on the outskirts of that
accretion disk it looks like it's
actually the magnetic field that's going
to dominate you know how that material
is going to move and where it's going to
be funneled to so that has huge
implications for not only you know how
supermassive black holes grow but also
how they interact with their galaxies
and sort of the medium surrounding them
as well which if you watched last week's
video about my PhD research then you'll
know that that's something I'm really
interested in so I am going to be
keeping a very close eye out for this
paper coming out cuz I think it's gonna
have some really interesting conclusions
to look at next up I want to talk about
this paper that came out this month by
bar toward a car and console ease which
was using the Hubble Space Telescope to
try and find the very first stars their
ever formed in the universe now one very
useful law of physics
the speed of light the fact that light
even has a speed limit and it's not
instantaneous going from one place to
another means that as we look at more
and more distant galaxies that light has
taken a lot longer to reach us if we can
look really far back we can actually see
galaxies where the light left those
galaxies right when the universe was
only say five hundred million years old
compared to the sort of 13.8 billion
years old that we think it is now
now one thing astronomers are very
interested in is when specifically the
very first stars and galaxies formed and
you might think well you know just look
back as far as you can until you don't
see anything else anymore but the
problem is that the universe is
expanding which means the light from
distant galaxies gets stretched on its
way to us that's what we call redshift
and the further distant you look the
more redshift the light will be it means
that stars that gave out visible light
optical light that you know we use to
see the universe around us nearby is
stretched so much that it's no longer
visible by our eyes anymore by optical
telescopes for example it shifted so
much that it's gone into the infrared
part of the light spectrum and sometimes
even beyond that as well the other thing
though is that these galaxies are also
very faint so you need a really good
telescope that's gonna collect a lot of
light to be able to even spot them in
the first place a telescope at the
minute is the Hubble Space Telescope but
it could only detect light in a very
narrow wavelength range so just above
sort of the blue and the visible light
into the UV and just into the infrared
part of the spectrum just below sort of
red visible light as well so it means
that you get to a point where even the
very brightest UV light given off by
stars in very distant galaxies is
redshift it's so so so much that it's no
longer even visible
Hubble at the very infrared end of its
detection range so as much as we'd like
to be able to just look until we can't
see any more galaxies anymore the
question is whether Hubble can even see
that far back in the first place so this
paper by Barton a car and constantly sis
month was trying to put a limit on how
far back Hubble could see to be able to
say okay the first stars and galaxies
must have formed before this at least
how many this was so clever so they took
this image of a quite nearby galaxy
cluster it's called ma csj zero for one
six point one dash two four zero three
it's named after coordinates what kind
of say if you want to give it a better
name let me know in the comments what
you think it should be called anyway
this cluster is relatively close to us
the light was emitted about four billion
years or so ago but what this cluster
does is because it's in the foreground
from our perspective in front of sort of
the background galaxies in the very far
distance that we actually want to study
that are very faint what this foreground
cluster does is it acts as a lens a
gravitational lens it curves space-time
by Einstein's general relativity and
what it does is it as the light from
those background galaxies is coming
towards as it gets bent and magnified
for us here on earth so it's as bright
the light that we know was emitted sort
of like 13 billion years ago as the
light that was emitted four billion
years ago that we can detect in this
very nearby cluster which is great but
then of course you've got all of the
light from this foreground cluster of
galaxies getting in your way and so what
the first thing that the others had to
do was actually to first of all model
for where all those galaxies were that
were in the foreground and then subtract
that light off to be left with just
those background galaxies that they
wanted to study and that's what you can
see here in this image what you can see
here are the galaxies that Hubble could
still detect and the light from them
left and when the universe was only
about 500 million to about
million years old this is very ancient
light now obviously the big question is
working out whether what you have
detected is actually the very first
galaxies and first stars or whether it's
just the limit of what Hubble can
actually see that's not red shifted out
of its range so what bar Sega and cons
least did would measure something called
the UV slope which is often referred to
as the Greek letter
besa and essentially what it does is it
tries to say how much blue light
compared to how much red light a galaxy
has so if you were gonna make a plot of
how much light of each wavelength or
color you receiving from a galaxy you
would see it would have some slope
upwards or downwards if the slope was
negative it would mean it would have
much more blue light a lower wavelength
or if the slope was positive then that
would mean it would have much more red
light okay
longer wavelengths now according to our
models of how stars evolve and then like
what a big collection of stars would
give you in terms of like the light that
you would get at each wavelength the
most negative slope you can get ie the
bluest slope is when you have very young
hot stars that have formed out of
pristine hydrogen the kind that you
would only find in the very early
universe after the Big Bang because now
we're sort of 13.8 billion years later
the stars that are forming are forming
out of that supernova poop again right
after a star's lived and died it's
converted a lot of the hydrogen into
helium but then also into things like
carbon and nitrogen and oxygen so for
example the fact that our solar system
even exists and is made from things like
carbon and we breathe oxygen tells us
that the Sun formed from gas leftover by
a previous generation of stars that
maybe also even formed from a previous
generation that maybe could have been
the very first stars in the universe so
what bar Staker and conflicts did was
measure this UV slope this beta for all
their galaxies obviously they weren't
actually measuring it in the you
because it actually got a redshifted so
much that it was actually down in hubble
sort of like infrared regime really
actually measured it but what they found
was that none of them had slopes that
were negative enough to be the very
first generation of stars so what this
people was able to do was put a limit on
when the first stars in the universe
were born and because they didn't detect
any evidence for them and their most
distant galaxies the light from it left
the universe when the universe was only
500 million years old
it means the first stars have to have
formed when the universe was younger
than 500 million years old and the first
author of this paper rashanna bastard a
car is actually my old office mate from
when I worked at the University of
Nottingham she was a PhD student when I
joined after just finishing my PhD and I
figured you know what it's been ages
since me and rats had a chat so I gave
her a course that we could chat about
this really cool result together so this
result is really cool you know being
able to put a limit on you know like how
early the first stars formed but it's
kind of sad that like Hubble can't see
them right so like what is the plan like
what's the next step
yeah I mean it is sad but it is also
really exciting at the same time because
in our work with hoggle we were able to
look at a very young universe that is
just 500 million years old and the good
thing is that we will be able to get an
answer to this question because JWST the
James Webb Space Telescope it is
scheduled for a launch next year in 2021
and JWST is will be able to look even
further back in times as far back as
when the universe was just two hundred
million years old and so yeah it may
help us answer this very fundamental
question so I guess you're really hoping
then to get time on the James Webb Space
Telescope after it launches like if you
already like put in an application or
you like so wait I know so I'm a member
of the GTO team and so yeah I'll have
access to some of the very first
propriety data so that's a privilege
that's really cool that's a yes
so I guess like for you like the first
stars of the universe is like
two mice of obsession with supermassive
black holes then yes exactly I mean
video excited to know what what is very
force luminous sources which caused his
Rihanna's ation we don't know and this
is one of the most fundamental questions
and it is also one of the unanswered
questions in astronomy and so yeah that
was so cool to hear from much there so
thanks so much to her for taking the
time to speak to me and also to you guys
as well I've linked her Twitter profile
if you want to follow it down below in
the video description along with the
paper that she's written up about this
result and all the other papers that
I've talked about in this video - I
remember when I did the video in January
on the Radcliffe wave that you know a
giant wave of gas they discovered in the
Milky Way and I got on the scientists
that were actually responsible for that
result
I remember the comments were just
overwhelmingly in favor of doing that
again because it's just so nice to hear
from the people were so enthused about
their work and you know put sort of like
faces to the names that are actually
behind these pieces of paper that we
look at all the time so I'm definitely
going to try and do more of that in the
future so I hope you enjoyed that if you
did subscribe hit the like button maybe
check out my book that came out in the
US and kind of there last week as well
it's already out worldwide there are
links in the description below if you
want to do that but all that's left for
me to say I think is thanks for watching
and until next time happy stargazing so
astronauts Bob Behnken and Doug Haley
made it safely to stop flickering extra
light why are you flickering stop it
stop it stages so astronauts Bob Behnken
and dog dog Halley so astronauts Bob
Behnken and dog thank God
Doug his name is Doug like the TV
program dude
ooh dude dude dude no no Christ does my
hair keep catching my mic oh it's so
long I feel like two months I can get a
haircut as well question is whether
Hubble is able to see that far back bck
that arbok